---
layout: post
title: Marketing Triage.
tags: [grain marketing, grains, storage]
---

Do you have an actual, written marketing plan of any form?

What are your plans for all that grain in the bins out back?

If your answer to either or both questions is no, it's not too late to make a New Year's Resolution to do a better job of marketing. 

But where to start? Since we are still so early in 2017, we can worry about new crop later. Right now, the question is what to do with the old crop supplies, whether stored on-farm or (yikes!) off-farm. 

There are four reasons to store grain:

1. Logistics: Modern farm and machinery size make it hard to run grain from the field to the elevator. Having on-farm storage shortens these round-trips and permits a faster pace of harvest.

1. Taxes: Cash accounting permits farms to defer revenue recognition for grains stored into the new year.

1. Drying: While I don't have any firm numbers, I've had enough growers swear that they can dry more cheaply than elevators that I believe them.

1. Storage Profits: Past January 2nd, the only reason to store is to earn profits from storage--like an elevator--and that's what we are going to talk about for the remainder of this note.

Grain storage is one area in which farmers can actually increase their mean profits without any additional risk. Why? Because they are providing a service to the market, they are helping insure that a crop that is only harvested for two months per year is available for consumption all twelve months.

However, this profit isn't earned through the old 'pour and pray' method. Storing unpriced bushels exposes the farmer to all of the risk of the grain futures markets, and those losses can quickly and easily overwhelm any storage profits. Grain elevators make their profits from futures spreads (the differences in futures prices as we move from one maturity to the next later maturity) and from changes in basis. Because elevators can be long or short the spread, they can profit from increasing or decreasing basis, and in markets with positive spreads ('contango' or 'carry' markets) and negative spreads ('backwardated' or 'inverse' markets). Because farmers are naturally long the underlying commodity, they do not have the ability to profit from inverted markets or weakening basis.

If you are somewhat new to this, it can all be a bit overwhelming. But don't worry, because I'm about to show you how to make it really simple. Sang-Hyo Kim & Carl Zulauf studied these relationships extensively to find just how well some simple rule-of-thumb storage strategies would perform. Specifically, they assumed that a farmer, harvesting in October either stored until July automatically (naive storage) or made a decision whether to store based on historical basis patterns (basis strategy). Likewise, the farmer might choose to hedge using futures on a 1:1 ratio or not. This yields four different choices: naive storage, hedged naive storage, basis strategy, or hedged basis strategy.

Kim & Zulauf calculated the returns to these four strategies from 1975 to 2012. The results are in table 1. 

|         |               |           | Hedged     | Unhedged  |
|         |   Routine     | Routine   | Basis      | Basis     |
| Profits |   Un-Hedged   | Hedged    | Strategy   | Strategy  |
| -----   | ------------- | --------- | ---------- | --------- |
| Average | $0.08         | $0.01     | $0.05      |   $0.04   |
| Max     | $1.51         | $0.27     | $0.27      |   $0.32   |
| Min     | -$0.65        | -$0.34    | -$0.03     |   -$0.14  |
| -----   | ------------- | --------- | ---------- | --------- |



Did your 2017 New Year's Resolutions consider marketing?


Toda