---
layout: post
title: Computing and My Money vs. OSU Money
tags: [personal, computing]
---

![laptops on my desk]{"{{ site.url }}/img/laptops.jpg"}

The picture above encapsulates a lot about my previously-discussed transition from Ohio State University to Kernmantle Group. For the past 15 years, all of personal computing has been done on OSU computers, and the majority of them have been MacBooks. 

On the left are a 13" MacBook Retina (early 2015), i5, 8GB RAM, and 512GB SSD, which cost $2200. In front of it is a 12.9" iPad Pro 32GB, which with the Apple Pencil, costs $850, for a total of $3050. This has been my OSU setup since the iPad Pro was released, and this laptop, and a 13" Retina i7 prior, have been my steady travelling buddies for the last 5 years. While $3k seems like a lot, honestly, its not that much *when it's someone else's money.* And while that sounds pretty callous, it is entirely true.

To replace my OSU setup in moving to Kernmantle, I needed a few things: 

* Sufficient disk space and computing power for everything from crunching lots of data to editing speaking videos, and the ability to drive at least 2 large (HD/WQHD) monitors. 

* On the road, enough power to run RStudio to update my charts and plots, and do it on the machine, not via RD back to my home office.

* Pen-based input. For me, the iPad Pro has been excellent. I had a Dell 2-in-1 about 10 years ago which was a so-so laptop but it really made me love pen-based note-taking. In 2007, I travelled to South Africa for 10 days on a research project, during which time I conducted a dozen or so interviews. In OneNote, I could quickly write notes while also recording the audio for later review.

* Small and light. I travel a decent amount now, and I'm going to be travelling significantly more now (I hope). While the 13" Retina + iPad Pro aren't *large*, combined with their chargers, I can feel the weight in my briefcase/backpack.

# Step 1: Get a MacPro for home.

I realized pretty quickly that the best way to get all the power and disk space at home was a desktop Mac. However, the new MacPros are entirely prohibitive (they start at $2699), so I started investigating building a Hackintosh. But as this was going to be my main computer, the inevitable tinkering was a distinct worry. But then I came across many professionals who still use the 'cheese-grater' MacPro's. The ones made from 2009 to 2013 can still run the latest operating system, and they can hold up to 4 internal drives. Plus, they are highly expandable. After some looking on eBay, I ended up with a Quad 3.2GHz Xeon machine for $400. I added a 512GB SSD and two 3TB hard drives and had a fast, capable machine that could easily run a 1080p monitor as well as my new ASUS WQHD monitor. 

So I covered point 1. Now for the harder part: the travel setup.

# Can a Surface do it? 

Since I have used Windows before, and I support many Win10 clients at Vertical Adventures, I first tried a Surface 4 Pro, which is a very competent laptop and also is natively touch-enabled. Costco was running a special with the 4GB/128GB Surface combined with the keyboard for only $749. This combination gave me solid computing power, pen input, and now with Windows 10 Anniversary, had a native bash environment. 

However, as I've tried to transition to much greater reliance on R for both my analysis, but also my slide creation, my scripts all have to have many file references in them. Dealing with Mac vs. Windows path syntax, plus available command-line tools so I could use code both on my laptop but also on Samson (my 2012 MacPro at home) just created more 

On the right is the final kit, a 2015 MacBook 1.2GHz/8GB/512 and a 9.7" iPad Pro with Apple Pencil (not pictured), which cost $1850 together. I lose the additional size of the larger iPad, and I had to spend $50 on a port adapter for the USB-C port.

